Ex-FBI boss investigated for seashell photo seen as threat to Trump

Former FBI director James Comey is being investigated by the Secret Service after he shared then deleted a social media post, which Republicans alleged was an incitement to violence against US President Donald Trump.Comey posted on Instagram a photo of seashells that spelled the numbers "8647", which he captioned: "Cool shell formation on my beach walk."The number 86 is a slang term whose definitions include "to reject" or "to get rid of", according to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, which also notes that it has more recently been used as a term meaning "to kill". And Trump is the 47th US president.Comey insisted he did not know what the numbers meant, but Trump has disputed that.
Comey deleted the Instagram post, saying in a follow-up that he "assumed [the sea shells] were a political message"."I didn't realise some folks associate those numbers with violence," he added. "It never occurred to me but I oppose violence of any kind so I took the post down."But Trump argued that "a child knows what that meant"."That meant assassination, and it says it loud and clear," Trump told Fox News in an interview, clips of which were released before broadcast on Friday. "Now, he wasn't very competent, but he was competent enough to know what that meant."In a post in X, Secret Service spokesman Anthony Guglielmi said: "We vigorously investigate anything that can be taken as a potential threat against our protectees."We are aware of the social media posts by the former FBI Director & we take rhetoric like this very seriously. Beyond that, we do not comment on protective intelligence matters."
Trump survived two assassination attempts last year.Current FBI Director Kash Patel responded on social media, saying that the bureau was "aware of the recent social media post by former FBI Director James Comey, directed at President Trump"."We are in communication with the Secret Service and Director Curran. Primary jurisdiction is with SS [Secret Service] on these matters and we, the FBI, will provide all necessary support."Secretary of Homeland Security Kristi Noem said on X: "Disgraced former FBI Director James Comey just called for the assassination of Trump."She said her department and the Secret Service would investigate the matter.White House Deputy Chief of Staff Dan Scavino posted on X, accusing Comey of "a plea to bad actors/terrorists to assassinate the POTUS' while traveling internationally", referring to Trump's current tour of the Middle East.The president's eldest son, Donald Trump Jr, also responded on X, commenting: "James Comey causally [sic] calling for my dad to be murdered."Comey served as the FBI's director between 2013-17.He had a tumultuous tenure that included overseeing the high-profile inquiry into Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton's email just weeks before the 2016 election that she ended up losing to Trump.He was fired by Trump amid an investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election.
Follow the twists and turns of Trump's second term with North America correspondent Anthony Zurcher's weeklyUS Politics Unspunnewsletter. Readers in the UK cansign up here. Those outside the UK cansign up here.